---
layout: post
title: The Evolution of 6.004
thumbnail:
---

A question was asked on MIT's Course 6 Piazza forum about how 6.004 has changed over the years and what the rationale was for this change.
As a student of the old version of the course and a TA for the new version, I had some thoughts about this issue.
<!--more-->

To put this into some more context, a student posted the following question on the Course 6 Piazza:

> ...
>
> I know that 6.004 at least has gone through revision, but I also never learned why!
> Any insight is much appreciated--just curious on some Course 6 history!

The anonymous student answer expressed some frustration at the change:

> ...
> It happened because Chris Terman retired.
> He was basically a teaching god, but the next guy thought he could do it better and messed it up big time in the process.
> It's taken years to get back to a fraction of the power that Terman's lectures and the Jade design language had.
>
> \- Anonymous Atom

Many students at MIT were disasstisfied when 6.004 underwent a large revision several semesters ago.
However, I felt that this answer lacked the nuance and context surrounding the decision, so I posted the following response to explain some of the changes.
It was originally posted anonymously, but I have been asked about this several times in my time at MIT, especially after becomming a TA for the course, so I figured I would put my thoughts on this matter here.

> As someone who took the “old” 6.004 as a freshman and joined teaching staff for the “new” 6.004, I wanted to add some perspective besides Atom’s answer above.
> There are compelling reasons the course has changed that go beyond just someone thinking they could do it better.
>
> The biggest changes made to 6.004 are the addition of a Hardware Description Language (HDL) called Minispec (based off Bluespec) and the move away from the Beta ISA to RISC-V.
> Aside from that, the concepts are largely unchanged.
> (You can even see ghosts of the original content in the current lecture slides!)
>
> Objectively, these two changes are modernizations of the course technologies.
> The original Beta ISA was based off the Alpha ISA produced by the Digital Equipment Corporation (DEC) in the 1990s I think.
> While revolutionary for its time, this ISA is rarely in use today.
> The course instead uses RISC-V which is a much more modern ISA.
> Being newer, it combines the wisdom of several decades of ISA design and is slowly growing in popularity (especially exciting with the recent acquisition of SiFive by Intel) which also means more resources available online for students to look at.
> The second change is the introduction of an HDL, namely Minispec, a simplified version of Bluespec.
> In the vast majority of modern hardware design, people do not manually lay out transistors and wires.
> Instead, they describe the hardware using a computer language (e.g. Verilog, VHDL, Bluespec) which then gets compiled into actual hardware.
> 6.004 now uses an HDL to build the circuits instead of the drag-and-drop interface in the old Jade simulator.
>
> As to my personal thoughts on this matter, I feel that it’s hard to argue against the move to RISC-V.
> There’s more and better documentation out there, and a large number of resources for the ISA.
> Also, a good amount of architecture research done today uses RISC-V.
> While most production systems today use x86, I’d be hard-pressed to try using x86 as a teaching language.
> As for the introduction of the HDL, I’m a lot more conflicted.
> On the plus side, it teaches a really, really practical skill that many employers look for in this area.
> On the downside, it takes a lot of class time (resulting in cutting out a lot of other interesting material), is really confusing when you learn it the first time, and I feel can obfuscate the actual architecture concepts being taught.
> My personal experience in this field is that building the hardware in Jade was super intuitive.
> The HDL stuff can be left for something like 6.111 where I found it trivially easy to pick up SystemVerilog once I had a solid understanding of hardware concepts from 6.004.
>
> All that being said, I think the use of Minispec over Bluespec has made the HDL stuff a lot easier to introduce and many of the concepts still get through to students.
> The old 6.004 was good in part due to Chris Terman’s incredibly hard work but also in part due to it having been taught for 10 years.
> This gives time to refine the material and teaching approach.
> While the transition to the new 6.004 was rocky, I think it’s definitely getting a lot better.
> Student feedback is being actively incorporated and there are revisions made to the course on the back end.
> It remains one of my favorite classes both from the learning and the teaching end.
